Testing, let's see, can you... Testing, testing, one, two, three.
Yeah, that's a good time.
Ready to get closer?
We good?
Maybe.
Maybe, yeah.
Or I can maybe... No, it's okay.
Does that work?
Yeah.
There we go.
Okay.
All right, so today is September 19th.
We're here with Dr. David Hayes-Bautista.
And maybe you could just tell me, well, your name and your age.
I've got my name.
I will be 74 in another three weeks.
Okay.
And then can you tell me, where did you grow up?
Where were you born and raised?
Oh, it's complicated.
I was born here.
In LA?
Actually down in the harbor.
Okay.
San Pedro.
Because my dad was in the Navy.
Then I was raised here.
We were raised there.
I don't remember that.
I was too young.
City Terrace, El Monte.
Then when I was seven, my family left LA, my immediate family.
I have extended family.
We've been here about 130 years ago.
Got a lot of family, but then just for his work, we moved to San Luis Obispo.
Actually, we lived outside of San Luis Obispo by Morro Bay, but outside of Morro Bay in a little tiny town called Baywood Park, where we wound up going for,
to probably one of the last one-room schools in California.
There were six grades, eight students, one teacher.
I was the third grade kid.
Then we were there for a couple of years.
And then my dad was a highway engineer, so this is when they were building the highway systems out.
He got assigned to work on Interstate 80 going over the summit.
So we moved up to a little tiny town 40 miles north of Sacramento when I was 10 called Yuba City.
And it was inhabited by an ethnic group that has since disappeared.
Okies.
Real life Okies.
Still coming out of Oklahoma in 1955.
And of course, this isn't like East L.A.
And I went to Culture Shock, quite frankly.
Yeah.
Then, you know, I was only there for seven years.
Fifth grade through high school.
But it marked me for life.
Um, and of course then we come back, spend every summer here in LA and you still, I see very different from Oakeyuba city.
Very different.
So is this like early sixties?
Fifties.
Oh, okay.
Late fifties, mid fifties, mid to late fifties.
We left, we left LA in 1952.
So I would spend usually summers here.
So I watched LA grow sort of in stop action.
And then seeing the family in stop action, you know, once a year.
Yeah.
Then when I graduated from high school, I couldn't wait to leave Yuba City.
So I went off to college and did my first two years at Davis.
At that point, there were two African-Americans in my class, about a half dozen Asians.
As far as I could tell, one Chicano, that was me.
Then I heard there were 25 Chicanos at Berkeley.
So I went down to check it out.
Sure enough, there were 25 Chicanos at Berkeley.
So I transferred.
felt like I died and went to heaven.
So I was a Berkeley during the third world strike and all that stuff.
I got involved in setting up La Clínica de la Raza.
Then I went off to UCSF where we were the first entering class at the medical center and been having fun.
And then 30 years ago, UCLA made me an offer.
I couldn't refuse.
I thought it was time to come back home.
So I'm back home and now
My last older aunt just died earlier this year.
So now we are officially the old farts, just me and my cousins.
Wow.
Yeah.
So, um, how would you, that's interesting.
I didn't know you were at Berkeley during that time period.
Then I was on the faculty at Berkeley.
I finished at UCSF in the basic sciences and I was shanghied onto the faculty in 1974.
I went through the series from assistant to full professor.
Mm-hmm.
And then UCLA came to calling.
Right.
So I lived in Berkeley for damn near 20 years.
Uh-huh.
My kids were born in Berkeley.
Would you say that, um, well, I guess maybe I should ask first, um, how you saw yourself or if you saw yourself as a participant of the Chicano movement?
I'm going to assume yes.
From the early days.
Yeah.
And was that, um,
Was that mostly from your interactions at Berkeley or prior to that?
Well, I mean, we could spend the whole hour just talking on early childhood experiences.
One of the side effects of spending 11 months out of the year in Yuba City and one month back in East L.A.
is I really understood, wow, these are two really different worlds.
No question about it.
And, of course, back then, presidential segregation was still on.
My uncle, Uncle Walt, in fact, tried to buy a house about 1952 or 53 up in San Fernando Valley.
They were just building it.
He actually had to have a white guy buy it for him.
Oh, man.
Because he couldn't buy it.
Yeah.
You know, that was still in force.
My parents were cautioned never to teach us Spanish, because we're already stupid enough, and of course that would make us even stupider.
In fact, I was categorized as mentally retarded at Cogswell Elementary School, which is still there in El Mahdi.
So that's, yeah, you grow up in that.
Yeah.
And then particularly up in Yuba City, Oklahomans are Southerners, and they have just all the racial attitudes of the South, just everyday, casually, viciously racist.
It was just the way it was.
And what years were you at Berkeley?
um that would have been like mid 60s yeah i got there in 1967 and graduated in 70 and i lived there while i went to ucsf and i set up la clinica de la raza 1970 in oakland and stayed there until 1987 i guess 20 years got married had my kids yeah got tenure did the whole thing
um I was talking with um Armando Rendon for this project and he was telling me about how he had um I think he said he moved from because he's also from the Berkeley area and that he had taken a job in Sacramento
as a journalist and that what really kind of drew him into the Chicano movement and and you know documenting it and stuff was um his he had an assignment to go check out Cesar Chavez and the march and so I was just curious because I know there's a lot of farm working in that area too Yuba City
Sacramento, what's the other little town there?
I had the other working with the last crews of Braceros in 1963.
Yeah.
I mean, I didn't know it was going to be the last year.
It was just, it's what you did for summer money.
Right.
Everybody worked out in the farms in the summer.
And so I was sort of the capataza de Braceros because I could speak a little Spanish.
Not very good Spanish, but you know, mas caja sort of thing, you know, quieres agua sort of stuff.
Didn't realize at the time, but yeah, that was back when
You know, there was no radio in Spanish except for one program from 5.30 to 6, the one station to play 30 minutes of Mexican music.
The theaters were segregated, but the, I believe it was the state theater in Marysville on Saturdays at midnight would show one Mexican movie.
All the braceros would go there.
That's what I grew up in.
Yeah.
So, excuse me.
So do you think it was just kind of like,
Living that experience of, you know, being segregated from the rest of the community, being, you know.
Well, see, the thing is in L.A., at least when you're a little kid, I didn't realize we were segregated.
It was just everybody's here.
Aunts, uncles, grandparents, cousins by the score.
I'm just, it's kind of what was.
Right.
You look back and you say, oh, yeah, we were probably segregated.
At the time, everybody was there.
Yeah.
So it didn't.
But going out to Yuba City, that was, whoa.
Yeah.
And I think, like, my question is a little more about what was it about that experience?
Because, I mean, obviously, you know, you or anybody who's participated in the Chicano Movement, they're not the only ones that are experiencing that.
But some people became active and other people didn't.
And so I guess I'm trying to get out.
Actually, I'm.
I'm not so sure I'd say it just like that.
Sure.
In fact, I did my dissertation at UCSF.
I was in the basic sciences.
I was originally going to do it on Latino patient behavior because at that point I had found my voice, so to speak, and I was very upset with the way Latinos being dealt with as a research topic.
We're always passive, fatalistic, superstitious, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And here we were setting up a clinic.
Hello, passive, fatalistic, superstitious.
Yeah.
Taking power.
And in fact, when I was an undergraduate, I read this one book written by an anthropologist, Margaret Clark.
And it's called Health in the Mexican-American Culture.
You can still buy it.
Margaret Clark.
Clark.
And I remember when I was an undergrad, when I read it,
I had two emotions.
The first was, wow, I'd never seen a book written about us.
So I want to read this.
Then as I read it, I got increasingly disappointed because she was depicting Latinos as this passive, fatalistic, folkloric, blah, blah, blah, believes in herbs, curanderos, would rather see them than go to a physician.
And at the end, I hated the book.
And I remember thinking,
Well, actually she described what my mom would do, but only one part.
She didn't describe the rest.
Like we were early in the polio vaccine trials.
We were still living here in LA.
I had braces on my teeth.
I mean, like that never happened to Mark because she was really interested in this exotic stuff.
Right.
And that's what most people at that point thought, well, Latinos don't go to the doctor because they'd rather go to a curandero.
So we don't need to do anything.
Well, we set up La Clinica because they weren't doing anything, but not because people would rather go to a curandero.
I put her on my PhD committee because I wanted to argue her into the ground and I did.
And I do that to this day because they're still, they have this narrative about what Latinos and Mexicans are supposed to be like that is so strong they don't even bother to look at the data, which contradicts what they think.
And then they bring those attitudes into the research lab and then they try to replicate them.
Yeah.
So that's, you know, I just got pissed off from a very early age on that.
That's very reminiscent of, I'm not sure if you're familiar with Octavio Romano's work.
I knew Octavio.
Yeah.
And there's a really like famous essay that he wrote in El Grito about that very thing, right?
I think I have a copy of it.
Yeah, socio-anthropological.
Yeah.
But here's where he and I saw things differently because he wrote and he complained.
I wrote and we did something.
We set up La Clinica.
We set up Bay Area Drastic Coalition for Health.
We set up National Chicano Health Organization.
We took on the most entrenched, racist, white, male-dominated profession there is in the United States, the medical profession.
Yeah.
And we're still taking them on.
You know, Octavia sat around and
pontificated pardon my but he never did anything well what about what about his the journals okay I'll give him a little bit well he was look he was a Chilango upper class and he had all the typical attitude I still see a Chilango upper class towards Chicanos he was kind of slumming but to me at least it was clear he was slumming
And in fact, we wound up being in the same school as a faculty.
And that's when we... Is that Berkeley?
Yeah, Berkeley.
He was, I think, a medical anthropologist, was he not?
Anthropology.
Yeah, he was studying, I believe, one of his articles, The Hero of Los Olmos.
So he's back into this curandero folkloric and everything else.
And you're dealing with medical school admissions, retention, clinic finance, policy, licensure, and you're dealing with curanderos?
Mm-hmm.
all right um so it sounds like to me if somebody was to say oh dr hayes bautista was a participant in the chicano movement would you agree that it was in this form of actually putting together you know taking that i don't want to say rage when you read
It's more than rage.
Clark's book.
She gave me rage, yeah.
Yeah.
After an initial euphoria thinking, wow, I've never read a book about us.
Yeah, but would you say that that work that you've been doing, right, the work that you continue to do in studying Latinos and health and stuff like that, that that is maybe your contribution to the movement and continuing that?
Certainly a piece of it.
Certainly a piece.
The reason why we just finished writing this book on the Chicano Health Movement is that my cohort set up close to 500 clinics in the 70s and the 80s.
They've grown up.
La Clinica is one of the major health care providers in Alameda Contra Costa counties.
I think they have about 30 sites.
Altamed used to be Clinica Libre del Barrio has grown up, now has over 60 sites.
I believe Altamed enrolled more people in
Obamacare than any other institution in California in La Clinica was number two.
We're celebrating our 50th anniversary, and nobody talks about us in Chicano studies.
Yeah.
The typical Chicano studies history is you had the brown braids, you had the walkouts, you had the moratorium, you had the crusade for justice.
Then in 1974, Casa got infiltrated, blew up, and it was all over.
Yeah.
End of story.
They're thinking, well, that's a pretty short story.
How come we're still around?
So that's why we interviewed 183 veterinarians, our story over 50 years.
We're still here.
And we changed healthcare policy in this state.
Yeah, that is very true.
So I'm glad I'm getting that and it will go in my... I'll send you a copy of the book.
It's going to come out.
It's going to be released November 7th at Altamed's 50th anniversary.
All right.
And we're still here.
And new generations constantly moving in.
Yeah.
So for 50 years, we've been doing everything we said we were going to do in the sixties and we did it.
We're still doing it.
We're taking on the UC medical school system right now.
Why do you think that is the year that your project is continuing and a lot of other projects?
That's why we wrote this book.
Oh, okay.
To try to figure this out and interviewed actually whole generation, not only our generation, actually there were sort of three generations involved.
There was the Chicano boom generation.
Is that your generation?
Yes, my generation.
And Castelo de la Rocha and Joel Garcia and Jane Garcia and everybody else.
Yeah.
Thank you.
I might be a little full.
That's okay.
As long as it's got caffeine, that's the main thing.
Then there was, and that went from about 1965 about 1985.
Then there was a subsequent generation that as they were just
finishing up medical school and coming out and doing things 187.
So they're the 187 generation.
Now we got this current generation that has just been whiplashed between Obama and Trump, the hope of Obama and the reality of Trump.
Yep.
Us old veteranos are still around.
Uh, we had a, uh, training session for mentors because we're trying to increase Latino enrollment still in medical school 50 years later.
And we sat in and filled his office in 1970 when he was
the liberal chancellor from the East Coast, from the Kennedys.
We sat in his office, he hated us, hated me.
Then two years later, he gave me the chancellor's award.
And don't worry, about in the 19, about 1995, I was asked to review his grant.
So yeah, part of it is we're trying to understand, well,
How come everybody else says the Chicano movement ended in 1974?
And we were just getting going.
We've been going for, and it's been now three generations.
Yeah.
And I keep people here.
I hear people saying, in fact, I was just reading Mario Barrera's book.
I happen to be having lunch out there.
His Beyond Astlan book.
He's basically saying, game over.
We're all assimilating.
No more activism.
It's all over.
We're going to disappear.
Yeah.
Same year I wrote my first book in which I projected that by 2030, California would be 40.
2.5% Latino.
And what would it mean?
It hit every decennial census on the book, right on the nose.
You can still buy the book that's published by Stanford.
The Burden of Support.
I just saw things differently from Mario.
We were involved in building things, taking care of people's health, changing policy.
Yeah.
Do you think that is...
a difference in, well, I mean, I know you said you talk about it in the book, but maybe you can.
Well, I don't mind sharing.
We're going to do other books out of this nice, wonderful data set.
You know, what were the things, when we go back to early childhood experiences, how did we, how did individually, because each one, every one of us has a different story, yet there are some similarities all the way through.
Mm-hmm.
that kept us going for 50 years when other people said, well, it was over in 1974.
And healthcare is different.
I mean, we have responsibilities.
Yeah.
We have people's lives in our hands.
Right.
The quality has got to be good.
It's not like setting up just a parade or a manifestation.
Yeah.
This is every day.
And that's what I was going to kind of ask is whether the kind of the foundation or foundational principles is that you're dealing with like,
people's material lives and and their bodies and you know and stuff like that rather than this more kind of like ephemeral identity um culture type of i mean it's all part of that but do you get what i'm saying or no well yeah and actually what we point out in this book is that in many ways we adam braided obamacare 50 years before obamacare
We said, why not?
Healthcare is a right.
In fact, our goal, when we set up La Clinica, I remember we said 1970, here's our goal.
We're going to bring services where none exist.
We're going to bring them in Spanish.
We're going to bring them for free.
We have $240.
Let's roll up our sleeves and get going.
And by the way, we refused federal funding.
It was days of war and party.
We saw it just totally corrupting.
So it happened in Oakland.
So we refused federal funding.
We did it the hard way.
And maybe because of that, LaClinica is there and grown tremendously.
We took no shortcuts.
We believed that patients should run these clinics.
So the majority of the boards of directors had to be patients.
We believed in empowerment, that health included income, education.
They're now called social determinants of health.
Our goal was to have healthy, empowered patients
living with healthy, empowered families in healthy, empowered communities.
So voter registration, all this stuff that was built in, that's how we deliver care.
And what was it?
I mean, like I said earlier, I'm doing, I'm in philosophy.
So this is all really interesting to me because now I want to know like, well, what informed those positions to have that mission, you know what I mean?
You know, many people,
have seen the Chicano, it was kind of a me too.
Well, first was the civil rights movement, then the women's, then gay and American, then oh, me too, here comes the Chicanos.
Well, they weren't rearing, and they were over by 74, so blah, blah, blah, blah.
That's not what we see in these interviews.
What we see are sort of the independent roots of the Chicano movement that in many ways I would say it would have happened even if there hadn't been civil rights, because we have our own roots and we tend not to recognize.
The roots of the Chicano health movement came out of
liberation theology out of South America, the pedagogy of the oppressed, and then the three wonderful weeks in 1960 when Fidel Castro strode into liberated Cuba and Vatican II was convened and we just felt, wow, we can do anything.
And that was not part of the civil rights or women's or anybody else.
That was our.
Right.
This is what, and our veteranos mentioned those over and over and over and how important they were
We firmly believed la cultura cura.
Whereas Margaret Clark saw our culture as being backwards and holding.
We thought, no, that's the answer.
We need more of it.
And that was our motto, la cultura cura.
So it sounds like, and especially going back to your participation with Third World Liberation, that a lot of this is kind of coming out of this anti-colonial movement of the 50s, like post-World War II.
anti-colonialism that you're seeing worldwide yeah but our particular branch was liberation theology was anti-colonialism pedagogy paulo freder is anti-colonialism clearly the cuban revolution for about 10 years was a bright shining possibility and then uh vatican ii did its thing etc um so it that was our brand of it that was our that's what formed us yeah
I find that really interesting too because I can't remember the name of the group.
I think it's from like the Bandung conference that they came up with kind of like a list of principles or values that these nations or states had kind of adopted.
So that's interesting.
Maybe since I think we're, I don't know what time it is exactly.
3.30.
Okay.
So maybe we can switch to the other topic, unless you have anything else you want to add about this period.
It was fascinating.
And I saw some dynamics that we still see today.
Just the issue of, well, okay, well, who is Chicano?
Oh, I was starting to tell you this, my dissertation.
I was originally, actually I got my first NIH grant to study Latino patient behavior.
And I did eventually offer an alternative model to Margaret Clark's by the simple act of giving Latino patients their agency.
How did they experience it?
How did they put it together?
Even though I was told by my dean,
Warren Winklestein, the day I was hired not to study Chicano Health, because I'd never get published.
I wouldn't get tenure.
Yeah.
I said, bullshit.
By then, I found my voice.
That's all I did, and I got accelerated tenure.
I got tenure and four years in a biomedical field studying Latino patient behavior, but giving them their agency instead of presuming their passive, fatalistic, superstitious, can't defer gratification, all that crap.
Right.
And the papers I did actually are good 50 years later.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
But because I was involved setting up, we set up the National Chicano Health Organization in 1970.
And it was primarily in the Southwest.
And our goals were increased medical school recruitment, admissions, retention, financial aid.
I mean, the hardcore stuff.
And so it was my job.
So I'd go to medical school, say at San Antonio, and we'd start organizing students.
I'd meet with the students and ask everybody on admissions, retention, financial aid, et cetera.
Then we'd go out and have beer at night.
And after about the fourth or fifth beer, I started getting these stories.
But am I really Chicano?
I graduated from high school.
My parents aren't farm workers.
Nobody in my family is in prison.
And who am I to say, yes, you are, you aren't, but I'd just, I'd be an ear.
But I kept getting all these stories of different backgrounds.
And this was the day of what I call the two-minute Chicano, where a true Chicano was like this.
And particularly from the more ideological perspectives, you have to be from the proper class, have the right class consciousness, then you're a Chicano.
If you didn't, in fact, I remember when I first came to UCLA in 1987, a
Chicano faculty person took me to one side.
And this is back when we actually used to have decent Latino enrollments here before they got rid of affirmative action.
So there are about 3,000 Latino students on campus.
So I said, well, it's nice to be here.
You've got a lot of Chicanos to do something like Berkeley.
Only 20 are real Chicanos.
What are they?
Oh, they're not really Chicanos.
They look around, but they don't have the right consciousness.
Well, what he meant is they didn't share his particular ideological perspective.
Yeah.
I saw a lot of that up at Berkeley early on, who is Chicano, and everybody, well, you are, you are, you are, you are.
As one of the medical students said this, playing these games, all that sort of business.
But then, this is up in the Bay Area, and as an undergraduate, my roommate was a Nicaraguanse, so I got to know the Central American community very well in the mission of the 60s.
And they're not Mexican, quite and large.
Now I know that's a holdover from the gold rush.
Um, but then seeing the, during the third world strike at Berkeley and then people come over from the mission, but they weren't Mexican.
They were Central American, Salvador and Guatemalan.
And I remember after the Chicago study department was set up at Berkeley, they couldn't find a chair.
So, um, it was Osvaldo Asturias, who has a San Francisco State, agreed to come over and be the chair.
And some of the more
Real Chicano students took his head off.
He was bourgeois.
He wasn't Mexican.
He's Guatemalan.
He wrote poetry.
He lived in a big house.
And he only lasted one year they took his head off.
So I remember those days.
That was as an undergraduate.
Then here I'm going around the southwest.
I'm in Texas, Colorado, New Mexico, and hearing these anguished stories.
I don't know what Chicano is.
People, sometimes they think I am, and they just tell me I'm not.
So what am I doing?
Plus, medical school is really different.
Very heavy.
professional socialization.
So I thought, hey, this is pretty damn interesting.
So I actually did my dissertation on the first cohort of Chicano medical students, dealing with this dual, very heavy, on one hand, a professional associate, you are a physician.
Of course, everything is totally white.
On the other hand, grappling with their identity.
Who am I?
What am I going to do when I get out?
Where am I going to practice and everything else?
So I did my dissertation actually on that topic.
Uh-huh.
And then you snuck in to gather those people and make it part of your, like, was that a gap that you were like, I'm going to get in there?
No, I was out there.
I was organizing the medical students.
Yeah.
Different chapters of the National Chicano Health Organization.
Like I say, this is at night after we had done the heavy organizing and formed committees and everything else.
We were just having dinner.
And then people just started opening up.
And I think because I was an outsider, they felt maybe safe sharing
their insecurities with me.
And who am I to say yes or not?
I just heard them.
Yeah.
I just read a lot of you.
A lot of varieties.
Yeah.
Interesting.
So you got the class, the ethnicity, Mexican versus non-Mexican, you name it.
Do Brazilians count that sort of stuff?
Yeah.
And I, I think that's actually interesting and a good way to kind of segue into the Messisa stuff.
Because, um,
Yeah, you hear a lot of that even today, right?
And you see it with like different groups, school groups and stuff, or even just a lot in like academia.
I don't see it a lot outside of academia, but, you know, like, oh, we're not Chicano, we're Chicanx, or we don't want to be affiliated with that term Chicano anymore, or Aslan, right?
And...
And I, you know, I think about, like, why is that happening right now?
Is it because, like, we just haven't, like, people who consider themselves to be Chicano, is it that they haven't educated, right?
They haven't, like, spread that message?
Or is it because there's just a whole, like, you know, is there a...
A learning gap, not a learning gap, but just, you know, the message is not being shared.
I'm a demographer, primarily.
Like I said, I wrote my first book, Going Forward.
I wrote it, started writing in 1982, going out to 2030.
Then I wrote my second book as a result of Prop 187, People Saying Things About Latinos.
looking really what are Latinos like.
And I use census data primarily from 1940 to 2000.
About 15 years ago, to do the medical research, I really needed to understand what is Latino, what is Mexicano, what is Hispanic.
And I had written on it in the 80s, but without a historical, not a deep historical context.
So I've become an historian, a demographic historian.
I have created a demographic model of Latinos in Los Angeles County from 1781 to 2017.
And I can tell you who is here, how they got here, what generation they were, whom they married.
And to make a long story short, there have been
eight waves of immigration from Mexico to here in the past 250 years on about 30 year cycles, leaving Mexico for different reasons.
And that has a lot to do with what will happen is Latinos were the charter group that brought Western society to California, the charter group.
They were a slice of Mexican society, identity and culture.
And they clearly represented that demographic.
If you look at the monument to the Pobladores downtown at La Placita, they were Indian, they were African, they were Mestizo, they were Mulatto.
Only two of the 44 were Español.
and i put that in comillas because to call somebody espanol in northern frontier new spain didn't necessarily mean you were from spain right could mean you spoke spanish it could mean you fought for the king you weren't necessarily from spain and both of them were married to indians so their kids obviously were mestizos so they were not from spain okay what got me into this i realized about
2003, I know when the Spanish got here.
Father said, I was taught that in the school.
I lived two blocks from Mission San Luis Obispo in third grade, and we learned California history.
I realized, okay, but when did the Mexicans get here?
Nothing.
I read all the history books, nothing.
They were Spanish, or thought they were.
So that's why I did, we pulled the data.
So the first charter group that was Western, but it was the Western society as interpreted by Indians and Africans and mestizos and mulattos.
That was their daily lived experience.
So they brought it up here.
Intermarried a lot with the local indigenous.
In fact, I do a lot of work on Cinco de Mayo.
One of the first poblanos actually came with the answer in 1775 from Chalchipomula.
He spoke Nahual.
He was here.
moved to L.A.
about 1790, married a Tongavit wife, and he was on the city council, an Aztec speaker married to a Tongavit speaker.
They had four kids, then later on he had .
His wife died, so he marries a Chumash, and they have more kids.
One of his great grandsons is a member of the Spanish-speaking
U.S.
Cavalry out of California and fought in the Civil War.
Okay.
Now, that doesn't sound like anybody's history of California either, but that's what we have in the data.
Right.
So we were a part of Mexico.
And up until 1848, we were a regional variant of Mexican society identity behavior.
Yeah.
Then came what I call, and these are my terms, the Latino Big Bang.
Ten days that shook the Spanish-speaking world.
Not only here, but around the hemisphere.
Uh-huh.
January 24th, 1848, gold is discovered.
Sets off a huge immigration from Mexico, Central America to South America into California looking for gold.
Yeah.
That historians have totally overlooked.
Right.
But I have the data.
I can tell you who got here, when they got here, how they got here, where they were.
Ten days later, we're suddenly part of the United States.
Uh-huh.
Now, the Mexican Constitution, when Hidalgo declared independence, he also declared in 1810 the abolition of slavery, racial equality, and citizenship, and continued the old Iberian legal tradition that married women owned property separately from their husband.
1848, along comes the U.S.
Constitution that allows slavery, denies citizenship to non-white, and when a woman marries, she suffered legal deaths.
The Latinos didn't like that.
So they went to the California Constitutional Convention, argued.
We came in as a bilingual state.
Married women had property rights separately from the husband.
Non-whites could become citizens.
And we were a free state without an accompanying slave state per the Missouri compromise.
We upset the balance.
We caused the Civil War.
So we had a big save all of this.
But the history books.
Right.
So we're putting it in.
So we've had constant.
However, during that big bang period, that's one big change.
The civil society here started to shift from being
a regional variant of Mexican society to something brand new, the Bilingual Bicultural Civil Society of Latinos de Estados Unidos.
It took about one generation to make that by about 1870s pretty much complete, and it has been here ever since.
When new immigrants arrive, basically they arrive and settle in amongst the pre-existing group, and that's the group they assimilate to.
And then they bring their understanding of things such as race, identity, culture, etc.
at that time, and that gets
shared here etc so the chicano generation by and large were the descendants of the sixth wave of immigration refugees fleeing the mexican revolution you had a seventh wave but it was a ghost wave the braceros but they weren't immigrants because they couldn't stay here yeah
But then when the immigration laws changed in 1965, along with the demise of the Bracero program, actually a big chunk of the immigrants had already complained about in 1994, where Braceros had been invited to simply change their status to immigrant.
That was the bulk of them.
We had to ask them in.
So at any rate, Chicanos tended to be either the grandchildren of those fleeing the Mexican Revolution or the children of the Braceros,
We're probably going to say this at the time they were conceived.
Then you started getting a new wave of immigration, 1965.
And that lasted until about 1990.
And then here in California, it kind of tailed off.
Basically, immigration has been just about zero.
I mean, you get people moving back and forth, but as many leave has come in.
And they have had children.
And I teach one undergraduate class here.
because i'm primarily in graduate medical education but i make sure right i'm trying to get kids into this so i teach one undergraduate class there are about 120 students in it and it's on latino health policy so generally you're only 95 latino students and i used to do just to show the power of demographics i started this class right after the strike here in 94.
So I'd ask people what generation they were, you know, first generation to stand up.
So I remember in 1995, I think is the first year I taught it, about a third of the students stood up.
Those who are children of immigrants, about another third stood up.
And those who are children, grandchildren of immigrants, about another third.
In fact, I used to get students come in and say, hey, my parents had to say hi because we've been involved in the Chicano movement.
Gradually, it moved up to about almost half was immigrant by 2005.
And now that's slowed down.
So eight months ago, it was in January when I asked who's an immigrant out of 120 people, about 10 stood up who are children of immigrants, everybody, grandchildren.
So those students in that class are not my grandchildren.
They're the children of that wave that came after the Chicano movement.
Right.
So that when I mentioned Cesar Chavez, they think of the boxer.
Yeah.
And people haven't, I mean, Sanchez hasn't figured this out.
Remember when the Brown Beret were having their 40th anniversary, I think?
It was in the mid-90s.
Maybe it was 2000, maybe 2000, somewhere in there.
And he was angry that nobody was showing up.
And so actually I wrote a column because he and I got into a heated argument.
I kept telling them, look, it's not like they stopped being Chicano or this.
I did the numbers.
80% of Latinos in LA County were either arrived after or were born after the Brown Berets.
How are they going to know about it organically?
Yeah.
They're not.
We have to teach.
Right.
But that's not what they grow up with.
Our kids, my wife and I have had, our kids have been in our laboratory.
God, I remember, I was still in high school all the year, 1999, 2000, having dinner.
My wife and I talked about the Chicano days, and our daughter piped up, well, I'm not a Chicana.
Okay.
What are you?
Mexicana.
I'm Latina, but I'm not a Chicana.
Okay, mijita.
When you hear the word Chicano, what comes to your mind?
And here's what she said.
Well, Dad, when I hear the word Chicano, I think of some old dudes with great beers and fat bellies sitting around drinking beer and complaining.
Oops.
both for her and our son, Chicano is retro.
Um, it's back there.
And sometimes for some reason they'll put it on, but it's kind of right now they can take it off because they're different.
And then you get the post millennials, the children of the children that were born out of that last wave.
So it's, and that's the way it's been going on since 1848.
Yeah.
Constantly new waves, older waves complaining about these new waves don't understand what happened.
And that's how we lost Cinco de Mayo, the history.
Um,
It got lost because of constant new waves.
We didn't have any institutional way of passing it on.
Now we do, called Chicano studies, ethnic studies, but the view we give still is very incomplete, which is why we felt compelled to write our history in the Chicano health movement.
It's simply not even mentioned.
Not even mentioned.
And we changed health policy in this state.
Yeah.
yeah it's interesting like especially when you like I've taken several Chicano history courses and you know you start to see a shift in the historiography where it's not just about like these very concentrated uh movements you know either like Crusade for Justice or Raza Unida or Tierra Amarilla um
but you're starting to see now more of this, uh, I mean, but the problem is that they're still talking about those things.
They've just kind of expanded it.
Right.
So like an example is there's more books on like farm workers, rural farm workers, rather than, uh, you know, a lot of the, the, uh, the typical, you know, Oh, here's what's going on in LA.
Here's what's going on in San Antonio or Sacramento or whatever.
Right.
Um,
But I think you're right.
Like, we haven't gotten out of that bubble of, oh, well, here's the famous things, right?
So, and that's part of, like, you know, my project.
Like, I'm very interested in, like, who are the everyday people that were part of this and what were they doing?
Well, let's talk about this thing called mestizaje.
Yeah.
Because, in fact, when I set up La Clinica, I purposely did not call it
the Chicano clinic.
I called it La Clínica de la Raza, using Raza in that much wider, like a familia sense.
And it's still called La Clínica de la Raza.
And I've actually, some people that we've interviewed actually, years after them, I stopped being director in 1974 when I took up the position.
I was on the board till 1980, but now generations way after.
And they have told me what it meant that it was called La Clinica de la Raza.
It was kind of like this nebulous thing that almost anybody could identify with.
One of the newscasters, Claudia Botero from Channel 34, came to see me.
It was about 10 years ago when La Clinica was getting ready to celebrate its 40th anniversary.
So I had an invitation on my desk.
She saw it.
She said, oh, do you know about La Clinica de la Raza?
Well, yeah.
the original founding director.
When we immigrated, and she immigrated as a little girl with her mom, I got all my pediatric care at La Clínica.
They're from Colombia.
I do Latino leadership training.
I remember doing a group with, I believe it was Coca-Cola in New York about 20 years ago.
One of the high executives go, I got my clinical care at La Clínica de la Raza.
I mean, just, it meant things to people.
Different things.
They could read in what it meant.
Yeah.
So here...
A lot of people love Jose Vasconcelos, la raza cosmica.
He's our man.
He got it.
But I have read Jose Vasconcelos.
You know, we have a conference going on this November funded by NIH on racially ambiguous babies.
And we have to classify them as providers.
What race are they were saying?
And when they're 52% racially ambiguous, 52% have mothers and fathers of different race ethnic groups.
What group are we supposed to put them in and why?
Yeah.
Why this group and not that group?
So we're looking at racial ambiguity and how we are going to be using that in biomedical research.
But in the 70s, I had reason to read books.
I'd heard about Jose Vasconcelos in the early days where he holds them up and reads about two paragraphs.
We talked about La Raza Cosmica.
But I read the whole thing.
And it's actually a genocidal tract.
He was figuring out what to do with the Indian problem, which has been one of the issues the Mexican state has always had.
What are we going to do about the Indians?
Yeah.
And, you know, sort of they threw the Afro-Mexicans and the Asian Mexicans under the bus.
What are we going to do with the Indians?
Vasconcelos' view was, well, what we'll do is we'll pull them out of the villages, they'll intermarry, and they will disappear into La Raza Cosmica.
Right.
That's how we solve the Indian problem.
Mm-hmm.
He was advocating basically cultural genocide.
Yeah.
And Chicagos to this day still say, oh yeah, he's got it.
Every time I cringe because that's not what he meant, but it's what was taken.
That's how people chose to interpret it.
Yeah.
Well, and I think, I mean, I don't know if it was even just that people interpret it that way.
I mean, I think that's the way it was promoted.
Right.
And I don't know if you're familiar with Bon Fil Batalla.
what the heck is his name, first name, Guillermo?
He's Mexican.
Yeah.
And in that, I mean, he calls it out and he says, this is ethnocide, right?
And so since we're talking about that, I think I want to ask you about whether you were
Like, where did you become informed about that idea or that concept of mestizo, mestizo?
Well, it's complicated.
And as everything goes back to family history.
My grandfather would come to L.A.
about 120 years ago during the Mexican Revolution, was very involved with Emiliano.
Our family town was founded in the year 1238.
It's still there.
Atlautla, right on the slopes of the volcano.
And that's Zapata country.
Now, he was living up here, but he actually organized Juntas Patrióticas de Emiliano Zapata all around the West.
In Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Montana, Idaho, Utah, Arizona, California.
to raise funds to send to Zapata.
He's very involved politically.
He loved the Mexican revolution.
He loved the Indigenista movement so much that in 1920, he went back to Mexico.
Only my grandma and her kids were here and they didn't go back to Mexico.
So it costs some bad blood in the family.
The story, one side that my grandma, he abandoned us.
The story, because I linked up with the other side of the family as an undergraduate.
That's part of my finding my voice.
I want to hear the other side.
Then Grace, he'd send the money every year and they'd never come and visit.
Not even for a week.
Okay, go figure.
He got really involved in the Indigenista movement.
And he wrote a history of Mexico.
A cockeyed history.
He was an autodidact.
He spoke, Nahuatl was his first language.
Then he went to school and I learned Spanish.
And then he lived up here, of course, learned English.
Then he went on and read other things.
He was very intelligent, never went beyond sixth grade, but an autodidact.
This was your grandpa.
My grandpa on my mother's side.
Yeah.
So he goes back to Mexico, gets very involved in the Indian Easton movement, wrote this cockeyed history of Mexico.
Basically, I can summarize it.
Anything good, we Indians did it.
Anything bad, the Spanish brought that.
A little bit
Mm-hmm.
But he used to boast that there was not one drop of Spanish blood in our family.
Now, our town has an interesting history, and it's not unique.
Other towns did.
It was founded in 1238.
We were conquered by Alicotl, the eighth Aztec emperor in 1488, and we were incorporated into the Aztec empire, which we did not like.
The Paso de Cortes is only about five kilometers away.
Mm-hmm.
And people remember, they talk about it all the time.
Basically, Cortes was the game changer.
And we got our freedom back.
And then we became, in 50, the Franciscans had the idea that the Spanish were corrupting Indians, which they were, because they wanted to set up Indian communities that would be free of Spanish influence.
So our village said, okay, we were, we said, we'll do that.
What do we got to do?
You got to get baptized.
Okay.
What does it cost to pass?
Okay, we'll do it.
And they still conserve, I have a picture of it on my laptop, the D1555 making this town one of these utopias, which meant nobody could ever come in and take the lands.
So they have maintained their society and everything else to this day.
And up until World War II, Nahuatl was the first language people had learned.
Then they learned Spanish as a second.
It's changed since World War II.
The highway got put in, the railroad got put in.
And I have a cousin that used to commute from the village to Mexico City.
She was a special ed teacher.
But he was, you could call him an indigenous nationalist.
He really was.
I mean, just, you're Indian, Indian, Indian.
And he hated the Spanish.
So I grew up with that.
We are Indians and we hate the Spanish.
So when they come to this, you know, indigenous, hey, well, I know that.
Yeah.
um but of course when i'd say i'm indian oh so what tribe are you from well um well actually not from one of these u.s tribes right oh so you're not indian you're a mexican well but he had this other view he didn't like mestizos he didn't like the spanish he was he was just a little strange
Very active, but a little strange.
So was it like a reaction to that idea or that real heavy kind of government push of mestizaje that's going on at that time?
Oh, he was against that.
Yeah, that he's like, no, we are not this thing.
We're Indians.
I don't know that he ever talked to Vasconcelos, but they would have had a knock-down, drag-out argument because he was very indigenous.
And that comes through the family emergency.
Somos indio, así que.
And of course, what's interesting is that beginning about 1980, you started getting immigration from indigenous from Chiapas and Oaxaca up into that area.
Milpalpa, you know, the town that Foster was in.
So you have indigenous, but they don't speak Nahua.
They speak Mixteco, Zapoteco, and you have the Nahua speakers.
So now you have a new
concept arriving and say so when you come who are the indigenous oh those they speak mixed text sapotec are you indigenous oh no that's the new term because you know you're getting intra-indigenous yeah if you will but this is how they at least the ones who say they were there first
say it or somos pueblo originario they are the indians saying this and not wanting to force fascinating stuff going on so it's a way to put down the the other and the others are kind of like mexicans here they do the farm work they live on the outskirts of town it's hard for them because these pueblos originarios still have these titles so you can't just come in and say i want to buy some land it's a very involved process right right
So I kind of came at it from a slightly different perspective because of my grandpa.
Yeah, and that's actually been really interesting with some of my interviews is how people have gotten or were exposed to this idea.
Let me just show you something two days ago that happened.
Sure.
In our family town.
I don't think it's over.
Just two days ago, September 16th, this is my grandpa, Margarito Bautista Valencia, and my great-grandfather, Jose de la Luz Bautista, and they were given a September 16th.
And what is that for?
It was just a commemoration.
It was interesting.
It used to be, it would have been for Hombres Ilustres, now it's Personajes Ilustres.
If you go in Guadalajara, there's this Rotonda that for 150 years called Rotonda Los Hombres Ilustres.
And I just noticed two years ago, they sort of reworked it so it's Personajes Ilustres.
They actually have women in there now.
So anyway,
He went back and he stayed there and he died there.
Wow, interesting.
Very happily involved in all his life.
That was just two days ago.
So I sent some words down.
I was connecting, okay, here's grandpa, great grandpa doing this.
I was doing this up here.
They were my models.
Yeah, yeah, that's interesting.
See, you could have mentioned that when I asked you about the, what was the links between your experiences.
Most families, families.
In every case, in every single one of these 183 interviews, it's always the case, it's personal biography.
Mm-hmm.
And then finding your voice through that personal biography.
Right.
And everybody has a different biography, no two are alike.
Yeah, yeah.
So, I mean, I think this is good for the Messisaha stuff because that's really kind of like the question I'm trying to get at is,
uh like i'm really interested in in what i've perceived to be a gap and i'm learning more and more that there's really not there's not a gap between like vasconcelos mestizaje and then the mestizaje that gets uh like reinvigorated from chicanos during the chicano movement you know whether from like corgi gonzalez to you know the aloristas luis valdezes all of that um
Because to me, like in my research, it's like, there's a, there's a jump, uh, from messy side being this popular thing in Mexico to then all of a sudden it's here and all these, you know, young radicals are, are using it as a way to, to reclaim some kind of identity.
Right.
Well, um, actually there's demographic history.
that antedates that this has been part of the condition of the civil society of Latinos de Estados Unidos.
What happened in California during the colonial period, actually, even before Mexican independence, the folks came up and they were part of that 16-way caste system, the castas.
Even during the colonial period, that began to shift and morph and started to flatten.
There was what I call caste creep that somebody who arrived, there were a mulatto, then became an indio, then became a mestizo by the time they died.
Almost always in a light, lighter upwards way, but you started to get a lot of movement.
And finally, by about 1810, by the time Mexico declared independence, actually they had become so useless as categories.
Yeah.
There are only two categories that were used to identify people.
You're either , which meant you're a Catholic, you nominally lived a European, you wore shoes, you ate wheat, or you were , not yet a Catholic.
But it wasn't a racial designation the way it was in the U.S.
It was more of a cultural identity, religious, very heavily religious.
And yet it was also quite porous, just like the Poblano, the Mary Tongavit, then a Chumash lady.
You know, it's porous.
It's different from the U.S.
way of racial categorization.
Then, of course, you get Mexican independence.
And Mexico says everybody is a citizen.
They stop asking caste.
And you don't see it in the Mexican census until 1930.
Right.
They stop asking everybody.
And even then, they only asked, were you Chinese?
Only because the U.S.
was president because they were getting too much Chinese immigration over the border.
So they stopped asking it.
So by the time the U.S.
came around, I mean, race just wasn't, it hadn't been used.
You're either, you still had gentiles.
And you had gente de razón.
They used those terms.
In fact, they used them up through the 19th century.
But along comes the U.S.
And so he insists that people be a member of a race.
And that has upset Latinos.
And we've had the same reaction then that we're seeing now.
You get some who are happy being white.
or claiming to be white.
Right.
Most are not.
It's not that they're ashamed, but they're, why is this a big deal?
I remember in the California Constitution Convention, Pablo de la Guerra said, look, nature has given some of us a very dark skin, but we are from the state.
What do you mean we can't vote?
Define what is white, which they couldn't.
Right.
So this has been a constant ongoing thing.
The classic Mexican history, Mexico a Prevés de los Años, was written in the early 1880s.
And it was here in California.
People were reading it.
I was at the Dana Adobe up in San Luis Obispo just a year ago.
They've restored the Adobe and there was a full set Mexico a través de los signos.
So they knew about it.
You had interchange of newspapers and everything else.
So this issue of who are we?
Are we Indian?
Are we Spanish?
And you get those who say, well, really we're Spanish and others say really we're Indian.
Well, kind of in between.
This has been going on since 1848.
So actually these discussions are nothing new.
Yeah.
Nothing new.
We've been having them all along.
Can you be claimed to be Latino and not speak Spanish?
We start seeing that as early as the Civil War.
We're using pochismos.
That means you're not really totally Latino because you say grosería instead of abarrotero, right?
Or you say marqueta instead of mercado.
So you're pocho and lost.
This has been going on now for six generations.
Yeah.
Nothing new.
So would you say...
Is it that it's just a, like, okay, so some people I talk to and they say, well, no, I never read about it.
It was just something I thought was like common sense that these are just ideas that you've been, you and your family have been living with for generations.
And because my kind of perspective on it was
you know are people reading this are they reading vasconcelos um or where is it coming from and and there's a lot of different like kind of avenues that i'm discovering here and you know one is like yeah some people are probably reading it some people are you know they're so connected with people from the revolution those are like their grandparents remember those terms go back to colonial yes new spain yeah and
You had the 16-way categories, the castas, and mestizo is only one of the 16.
Yes.
So that term has just been part of civil society for almost 500 years.
Yeah.
Now, its meanings have shifted and changed, but the idea of somehow you're in between, you're a mixture.
At times, that's good, like the Mexican Revolution.
At times, like under perfidium, it's bad.
Yeah.
But it is.
Okay?
It is what it is.
And so we had likewise then up here in California with the added edge,
In California that up until the 1940s, as they were setting up the Mexican schools, separate segregated.
One of the reasons why they did it, for example, up in Ventura County was because really Mexicans are Indians and Indians can't go to school with white people.
That's why we're setting up a school for the Indians.
Yeah.
And they also didn't want to go to school with blacks either.
If there was blacks.
Yeah.
In that community.
So that's how we got the, or with Chinese either.
So that's how we got to say, because we were Indians.
So it's always kind of a mushy term, but it's in the civil society.
Everybody will use it, even though they don't know where it came from.
In the census, and I started noticing this in the 1980 census, which is the first time they have that Hispanic identifier.
And about half of Latinos nationally,
When asked what race are you, white, black, Asian, Indian, or other, about half said they're white.
Almost none said they're black or Indian or Asian.
And about half said, I have no idea.
I must be some other race.
And that has been consistent up to the last census.
Yeah.
I was on a advisory committee to the 1980 census because they were going to put that Hispanic in.
I was with Leo Estrada.
We were both on this advisory committee.
And they were trying to use Hispanic like a race.
We kept saying, well, it's not really a race.
And we didn't like the way they were operationalizing it.
And I remember when they did the 1980 census, they did the first summary file one, which is where they do the congressional redistricting.
And I remember this guy from the Census Bureau came up and he had a sheet of papers in his hand and he was furious.
And he said, do you realize in the 1980 census
Half of Hispanics failed to respond correctly to the question on race.
What do you mean we failed to answer?
You're asking the wrong question.
Yeah.
Okay.
So we've always had to deal with that.
It's always over there.
But that doesn't allow of in between.
Yeah.
But Mestizo is kind of an in between.
And the Census Bureau a couple years ago tried different questions to ask Latinos about race.
And when they asked Mestizo...
If you ask, are you Indian?
Very few Latinos say they're Indian.
Ask if they're indigenous.
About a third say, yeah, I'm indigenous, but not Indian.
Or even if you ask if you're Afro-Latino, about a quarter will say, yeah.
But if you ask, are you black?
No.
Because those are sort of the preconceived, if you will, U.S.
racial narratives.
We just don't fit these things.
But we have our own in-between categories.
We're more comfortable being multivalent.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Civil society speaking.
Interesting stuff.
Oops.
Yeah, I think we're over our 4 o'clock time.
Okay, just a couple of quick questions or something.
No, I mean, I don't have any other questions.
I mean, that's mostly what I wanted to get from this.
If you have anything else you want to add.
Get my 2017 book.
Which is what?
La Nueva California.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay.
Latinos from pioneers to post-millennials.
Because I deal with this.
And in fact, I point out, racially, we are Indo, Afro, Oriental, Ibero, Americanos.
And by the way, at my conference having November, we have a panel from Genomics.
What does Genomics teach us about?
We are basically, yes, that's who we are.
Yeah, they've done this called the thousand genomes project all over Latin America and also a sample here in L.A.
Basically, every Latino has some indigenous.
Every Latino has some European and every Latino has some African.
Yeah.
So by the one drop rule, 90 percent of us are African.
Right.
you ever think about um i don't know if you're familiar with like jack forbes's work on mestizaje um but he makes a really like like one of the things i i'm going to be covering in my dissertation is this idea that like only people south of the border are mestizos right and one of the things that forbes talks about is like everybody's
can miss diesel right that's that's what the dna testing now has shown up much too many people's chagrin um races as separate natural homogeneous categories yeah basically don't exist yeah clinal but it's the clinal wherever you put the divide between this is not white that's like that's totally arbitrary yeah it's clinal yeah
yeah interesting what are your thoughts on those dna testing because i hear like oh they're not very accurate well here's the thing to begin with this is medicine yeah it's probability yeah there's a lot of uncertainty and you may have noticed over the years well they used to say well i was so much black and so much white now they don't say that my dna comes from this region and from that region but
No region was inhabited by only one quote-unquote race.
Right.
So it just came from that region.
It doesn't mean racially anything.
But people still try to impose modern maps.
I mean, this is so damn funny.
In the census, when you talk about race, particularly given Asian, they have these different Asian races, Chinese, Korean, Japanese, Vietnamese, Cambodian, Filipino, et cetera.
Vietnam didn't exist until 1947.
Okay.
That's a modern...
geopolitical entity, and suddenly it's a race.
It's a racial category.
Check the census.
And I'm thinking, well, this is really, wow.
People have been living in that region 20, 30, 40,000 years, but suddenly we're going to pretend, oh, you were Vietnamese 10,000 years ago, or you were German 10,000 years ago?
No.
So we have continued to put our current, it's almost a presentism, but then assuming that they're there
unmolested untouched they didn't move nobody moved in right right so yes real dna understands all of that the real genetics the real genomicists they understand that it's probability and it's regional just tells you what part of the globe did it come from yeah yeah well and i hear like that they're well i mean i guess that's kind of what you're talking about with the probability stuff but like they'll they'll say you can get
You have tests from two different companies, you're going to get two.
Yeah.
They won't be totally opposite or anything.
They may even look roughly alike, but you're going to get different proportions.
Yeah, yeah.
And if you have a sibling, your sibling will look rather different.
Yeah, I was watching one on identical twins that did in.
Their results were all over the place.
Yeah, so the idea that race, we know what it is, that it's precise.
These are naturally occurring categories.
they're mutually exclusive, non-overlapping, they're uniform, homogeneous, and permanent, never change.
That's not science.
But we use these categories in science as if they were.
Yeah, and that's kind of a lot of my project is to talk about this as to separate it from that kind of biocentric view.
We call it biological determinism.
Because they're not supposed to determine your heart attacks and your susceptibility to asthma and everything else.
Yeah.
Only it doesn't.
And that's why I think it's really important to kind of like look at the ideological aspects of it as opposed to just.
You absolutely have to.
We're suggesting we need to stop trying to find the biologically determinate part of the DNA.
I understand what we're really seeing are the effects of racial narratives based on the assumption that this exists and the subsequent racial structuring of society.
Right.
But that's what we're really seeing the effects of, not some piece of the DNA.
Yes, exactly.
So that's where we are.
Okay, I'm glad I got that on here.
All right, I'm going to go ahead and end this then.
Thank you.